[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The holistic world of healing
includes plants and herbs
channeling energy, as well as
both spiritual and physical
modalities.
Healers are
multidimensional beings
who dance between the realms
of the seen and unseen.
These individuals
have the ability
to facilitate a shift in
people, offering them insight
and support, reconnecting people
with themselves and the greater
collective, healing the
world one person at a time,
healing from the other side.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Chakra Natha was
founded in 2014.
When I realized that my personal
development practices had
helped me to overcome the
traumas of being adopted,
of being beaten, and
sexually assaulted,
I overcame the traumas of eating
disorders, divorce, addiction,
and self-mutilation
by being consistent
with these practices.
And I'm so blessed
to be a survivor who
is creating more survivors.
>> There's definitely a sense
of lightness after going through
meeting, or you're
in a spirit guide.
I think there's also a sense
of consciousness and awareness
that comes from that.
I remember just being so
grounded and very much in tune
with myself, most importantly,
but also my family, the people
around me, the spaces
that I find myself in,
and the people
that I come across
with I have to help them with
it through a psychological
perspective or through an
energy healing perspective.
So I met Kaye at
our private practice
where we both used to work.
I remember her coming in, and
we just immediately connected.
I'd love to say that
our energies connected.
And at that point in time,
I knew that she was probably
going to be someone quite
important in my life
from a spiritual perspective.
And that's where
our journey started.
I did my first guided
meditation with her, our journey
with her, where I did
meet my inner shaman.
I did meet my spirit guides
that was quite, I must say,
a moving experience for me.
And I think it helped me ground
and just feel quite connected.
>> But when it comes
to alternative healing,
the connection between the
healer and the patients is one
of such valuable importance.
So the reason I brought
Boitumelo with us today
is that we actually had
a very special meeting.
I began a new practice,
and I was in a space
where I was quite
unsure, and Boit
was dealing with some very
heavy information from family
and clients.
And we connected
so well together
that she provided me with
healing as I was providing her
with healing.
And so this has been a very
special journey for the two
of us because, in
working together,
we've actually both come
to new spaces of healing
within our lives.
And this connection
is what allows
us to have the trust between
us that we need in order
to enter the spirit world.
The work that I am
very privileged to do
has everything to do with
Native American, Indian healing.
And it's incredibly
exciting for me
because this is a space in which
we can work where people can
heal from the
subconscious as opposed
to having to relive any of
their negative experiences.
I was given my first year of
study as a wedding present,
and it was at a point in
my life where I really
desperately needed that
because I had no idea of how
to work with who I was.
So after my first
year of study, I then
got actively onto a course
of studying more alternative
healing.
And I've gone through
transpersonal psychology,
the shamanic Indian
ways of healing.
And then I also
do energy healing,
which is very similar to Reiki.
The shamanic ways of healing
all use plant guides or animal
guides, or we use
drumming to entrain
the brainwaves to help the
person reach a trance state.
And it's within
this trance state
that the healing takes place.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Working in the
environment with horses
has absolutely changed my life.
They have been a
part of my existence
since I was three
years old, and they
will be a part of my existence
for as long as I am here.
Part of the reason why I love
practicing on a property where
there are horses is because
the energy of the horse
is very far-reaching.
It protects the actual property
that I work on, and, in turn,
the sessions that I offer
are purer and stronger
because of them.
So as a shaman,
by definition, I'm
a person who can alter
their consciousness
or leave the body in
order to bring healing
for somebody else.
My background includes many
different healing modalities.
But today, we are
going to be focusing
on the shamanic journey process.
So this involves drumming,
and we do a guided journey
so that the person can go
and meet their spirit guide.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the world of
shamanic healing,
we use a large
amount of symbolism
throughout our practices.
You can put a lot
more information
into a small amount
of symbolism.
So this makes our practices
much, much richer.
We work with the medicine wheel.
And in the medicine
wheel, we take
notes of the four
directions, the elements,
certain animal
archetypes, and we
have our symbols to describe
each direction as well.
When we open the medicine
wheel, we start in the East,
and that is the element of air.
This is the direction
in the medicine wheel
where we call in the
eagle and the condor
to take us on their wings
to the place of spirit.
Then moving from the
East into the South,
this is the place of fire.
And our animal archetype in
this direction is the serpent.
She comes along to
teach us how to shade
our stories as she
can shade her skin,
but we are not our stories.
Then moving from the
South into the West,
this is our element of water.
And the archetype that
we call in the West
is the Otorohanga,
the black jaguar.
And we called the black jaguar
to cross the Rainbow Bridge
to be present with us in the
healing space to teach us
how to live without fear.
Then we move from the
West into the North,
and this is the place of earth.
This is the dwelling place
of all of our ancestors
where all the wisdom comes from.
And in this direction,
we call in the owl,
the one who sees through the
darkness and into the light.
After we finished calling in
our archetypes from the North,
we then go to the center
of our medicine wheel,
and we thank
Pachamama, our earth,
for being solid under our feet.
And we thank all the sky
and all of the cloud spirit
and wind nations for
their level of wisdom
that they bring to us.
At the end of every session,
we do close the medicine wheel
again.
And in closing, we would
start in the North,
then we would go to the
West, then to the South,
and then to the Middle East.
And finally, releasing
Mother Earth and Father Sky.
So this is the symbolism that
you will always see whenever
you go for shamanic healing.
This is the structure that we
use to set up our protections
and to focus our intentions
for the session ahead.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Today, in our presence, we
will have a very good friend
of mine, Boitumelo Boikhutso.
She is actually a psychologist.
So she comes from a
Western path of medicine.
And with the psychology that
she gives to other people,
there's always a
lot that she has
to process out of her own system
after having worked with them.
So this is something
we'll be focusing
on today with Boitumelo.
This process normally takes
around 40 minutes to 1 hour.
And it's a very gentle process.
So the patient lies
down flat on their back,
and we just talk them
into very deep relaxation,
which then leads into hypnosis.
And shamanic healing
is practically
the beginning of modern
hypnosis as we know it today.
So this is the
journey that we will
be taking with Boitumelo today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As a young energy healer, I
think the journey was in itself
for me, I was able to also just
attach it to my upbringing what
I've been exposed to spiritually
as well from a religious
perspective as well, having to
lay hands on people and healing
people through energy, being
able to also help people align
their trackers.
And I think that it links
quite beautifully in terms
of psychology being a
psychology graduate being
a registered counselor
and that a lot of people
that come into my practice
being able to read
the energies, which I
was already in tune with,
but I think it's just
been fine-tuned now.
I'm just from a
helping and a healing
process at the end of the day.
And I think helping people also
understand their own energies
and other people's
energies around them
and how that impacts us.
I am a registered
trauma counselor
by profession with the
Health Professions Council
of South Africa.
I am a broadcaster.
I'm an energy healer.
I'm a mental health
practitioner as well as
the founding director
of Boitshoko Consulting.
So why I'm here
today is, again, I'll
be embarking on the
spirit guide journey
with Kaye, where again,
you get into quite
a deep meditative state.
And essentially, what
Kaye does is guides me
through that journey.
Like I'd said, it's
not my first time
going through the
spirit guide journey,
would be my second time.
What it entails is about
meeting you in a spirit guide.
And I think that might
mean different things
for different people.
For me personally, because
I can only speak for myself,
we can always kind of link it
from an ancestral perspective,
a spirit perspective, and
I think a lot of things
for me started to make
sense after my spirit guide,
whether it be my
core, whether it
be how I relate with
the external world,
how relate with myself as well.
And having to go through
that journey really
just solidified
that relationship
with self, that
relationship with spirit.
And I think the
physical benefits of it,
I must say, that sleep was
no longer a rumor after going
through that journey.
I'm now sleeping much better.
I'm also more in tune in terms
of just what my body needs.
Mindful meditation
also became something
that was quite prominent
and prevalent at that time.
So there were quite a few
benefits that I can recall.
I'm super excited
about this session
because it's been a
few months since I've
gone down this
journey with Kaye,
I think, just again,
just to reacquaint myself
with my spirit guide.
And I also love to see
from a growth perspective,
from our initial
session to our session
now, how much more has
kind of grown and developed
within that space.
>> Thank you so much for
joining me today, Boit.
So what we're going to do,
I'm going to start you off
as I normally do
with a good smudging.
So the smudge that
I have here today
is North American
white sage, and this
clears all of the negative
energy out of your field.
[NON-ENGLISH CHANTING]
It is now time to enter
the shamanic dream
time to shift your awareness
into an altered state
of perception.
Relax even further and
feel yourself drift off
to an imaginary place in nature.
You can visualize
or feel yourself
laying in an open meadow.
And every way you
look nature abounds
in rich contrasting colors.
And all the sounds of this
world enticing you to descend
into the magical realm below.
You can feel yourself
moving downwind
deeper and deeper into the lower
world of the subconscious mind.
Take a moment to explore
your surroundings.
At the far end, you can feel the
clearing calling towards you.
And you can hear running water.
You can sense the presence of
your spirit guide patiently
waiting for you.
Sometimes if your
guide is an animal,
it may just brush
itself across your legs.
And if you feel
that sensation, just
imagine reaching
down to touch it.
Feel the love being
emanated from your guide.
Ask your guide what is
the wisdom you will share
with me today, and take
notes of everything
in your surroundings, for the
answer may not come in words.
And as we prepare to
return, ask your guide
to come back with you today.
And so it has come time
to return to the passage,
leaving the clearing in
the distance behind you,
and you will begin coming
back to the present moment
into the body.
Come back now.
I'm going to use the singing
ball to ground your energies.
Welcome you back to the body.
And take a nice deep breath
in again for me and all
through the mouth.
Today's session with
Boitumelo was actually
a really powerful one.
So as we spoke her
down into relaxation,
she is a person who drops
down into the subconscious
very quickly.
And once we were in the actual
parts of the journey where
she's communing with the guides,
I cannot actually see what
the person is seeing,
but very often,
I can feel what is
in our near vicinity.
And I can also pick up on the
emotions of the person who
is doing the journey.
So this time with
Boitumelo, there
was a lot of
goosebumps, which means
that the feeling of the
guides was incredibly strong.
And she asked before
the session that she
wanted to commune
with the water spirits
that she had made
last weekend when
she went for sangoma training.
So these spirits actually
came through very powerfully
for her, and they wrapped
her in their arms,
and this is why she could
feel the goose flesh.
The changes from the session
will go with her in the weeks
to come.
So she will find that
new understandings come
to the surface or
there's something that's
been healed within the body.
So for the next
couple of weeks, she
will still be benefiting
from this process
as things unfold in her life
according to the spirit guides.
>> My experience in the session
was a tad bit different from
my initial session with Kaye.
This time, they weren't
as many animals.
I remember my first
journey there was--
I actually saw my inner shaman.
In this particular journey,
there was much more feeling.
So I had goosebumps for
most of the journey.
Yeah, it just felt quite
deep lots of ground.
It felt like I needed
to kind of go deeper
in terms of just walking through
that particular narrative.
I think just a lot of
energies and a lot of stuff
kind of came up.
But ultimately,
I feel very good.
>> So with the shamanic
world of healing,
as you've all seen today, this
is work that happens in a very
ethereal world.
Most of our healing
happens in a dream state
or in deep meditation
or, like you saw today,
in actual hypnosis.
So what happens with these
journeys is we release,
and we are able to look
at what is happening
in our subconscious minds.
You can then identify
where the issues are,
and you have a way of receiving
guidance going forward with how
to deal with those issues.
So this is the reason why I love
my work so much because many
people with psychology
cannot actually talk about
the experiences
they've been through.
But when they come for a
journey process like this one,
it's almost like watching the
trauma from somebody else's
point of view.
So these patients are really
able to bring those things
to the surface and to deal
with them and to release them.
And this brings
about the balance
between body, mind, and spirit.
And when we balance
all three of those
then we work in harmony
with the planets around us
and the people around us.
>> Body, mind, and spirit.
They are all connected.
Practices like
shamanism are a tool
that allows us to delve deeper
into the world of spirituality
so that we can enable our
physical and mental state
to live in harmony.
[MUSIC PLAYING]